# Single-sample-GSEA-projection-ssGSEA-

Traditional gene set enrichment analysis assesses the differential coordinate up- or down-regulation of a biological process or pathway between groups of samples belonging to two phenotypes. The ability to assess that enrichment in individual samples, especially independently of pre-assigned phenotype labels, provides the opportunity to analyze transcription data at a higher level, by using gene sets/pathways instead of genes, resulting in a much more biologically interpretable set of features. Single-sample Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (ssGSEA) Projection accomplishes this.  ssGSEA projects a single sample’s gene expression profile from the space of single genes onto the space of gene sets. It does this via the ssGSEA enrichment score, which represents the degree to which the genes in a particular gene set are coordinately up- or down- regulated within a sample.  Any supervised or unsupervised machine learning technique or other statistical analysis can then be applied to the resulting projected dataset. The benefit is that the ssGSEA projection transforms the data to a higher-level (pathways instead of genes) space representing a more biologically interpretable set of features on which analytic methods can be applied.  Another benefit of ssGSEA projection is dimensionality reduction. Typically the number of gene sets employed in the enrichment analysis is substantially smaller than the number of genes targeted by a gene expression assay, and they are more robust and less noisy, resulting in significant benefits for downstream analysis.
